My name is Morgan Grainger,
and I'm a software engineer on
the iOS Apps and Frameworks team.
And I'm delighted to be here to give
you the tools that you can use to create
better experiences for your users.
Our goal today is to help you.
So to do that,
we're going to cover a large
swath of different topics.
First of all, we're going to try and give
you the basis that you need to
understand why memory issues occur
and what you can do about it.
We're going to talk
about why memory matters.
Why does it make such a
huge impact on your users?
Then we're going to get detailed
and kind of show you exactly
how iOS deals with memory.
And we're specifically going to
talk about what happens when the
system runs under memory pressure.
[Transcript missing]
So, why is memory such a big deal?
Memory is such a big deal because our
devices are immersive experiences.
They create these immersive experiences.
The user is in your application.
They're focused on the task that
they're trying to accomplish.
And in the worst case,
memory problems can manifest
themselves to your user as crashes.
And that is pretty much the
worst experience possible.
It takes the user out
of what they're doing,
puts them in a whole new context
that they were not expecting,
and then they have to start again.
And while that may be the worst case,
users also expect to be able
to multitask with our devices.
And if they're switching back
to your application and all you
have to show them is a loading
spinner because your application
was terminated in the background,
that's also a very poor user experience.
Ultimately,
memory matters because it has a
direct correlation to what your
users see and what they experience.
And this is a very real problem.
You see in App Store reviews,
we see this in feedback from customers.
this is a very common complaint.
Now, it's tempting to think that
the march of time is going
to take care of this problem.
You know,
if you look at the original iPhone or the
iPhone 3G with its 128 megs of memory,
and you look at what we've
accomplished over time,
each device has more and more memory.
And the new iPad actually has a
full gigabyte of memory available.
And so it's tempting to think, well,
you know, this may have been a
problem at the beginning,
but now is it such a big deal?
And the answer is that yes,
it is a big deal.
This is an iPad 2,
and it's a beautiful device,
and users did a lot of things with it.
But now with the new iPad,
you're essentially having to do
the drawing work of four iPad 2s.
So users are going to expect
more out of your applications.
As hardware gets more powerful,
as capabilities become greater,
users are accordingly going to
expect more out of your applications.
And the applications that deal with these
constraints most effectively are the ones
that users are going to love the most.
So memory matters.
Next, I'm going to talk about
how memory works on iOS.
We're going to take you behind the
scenes and talk about exactly what
happens at a memory level in the system.
And so I'm going to cover
a lot of things today,
but what I really hope you come away with
is this idea of what exactly this means.
This is a low memory log.
You may have seen it in iTunes Connect.
And ultimately, these are generated when
your app is terminated in the
foreground because of low memory.
So we're going to talk about
what a page is and how you
can reduce this number here,
this "our pages" number,
so that your application
stays running longer.
So there are three main things that
I'm going to cover in this section.
First of all,
we're going to talk about how memory
is allocated and managed on iOS.
Secondly, we're going to talk about what
types of memory use matter.
It turns out that not all
allocations are created equal,
and there's a particular distinction
between clean and dirty memory
that we're going to discuss.
And then third of all,
we're going to talk about what happens
when the system runs low on memory
and how it deals with that situation.
So let's start.
How is memory allocated
and managed on iOS?
And to start off at a basic level,
one key thing to note is that
memory is a per-process thing.
If you've got a pointer in your process,
in your address space,
that is different from that same memory
address in a different address space,
in a different application.
Memory is a per-application thing.
Now,
one thing you'll notice is that the range
of pointer addresses in your process,
in your application,
is actually quite large.
A pointer is 32 bits,
and that's actually 4 gigabytes,
which is a lot of space.
In fact, that's more space than there is
physical memory available on any
device that we've ever shipped.
And the question might be,
how can that be?
How can we have, you know,
logically make this amount of
memory available per process
without physically having that much?
And the answer is virtual memory.
We take all of the memory
available in the system,
divide it up into 4 kilobyte chunks,
and then not all of the memory that your
application can access is actually stored
in physical memory at the same time.
So let's dive a little deeper into this.
So this is kind of just a very
simplified view of physical memory
is divided into 4 kilobyte pages.
But you're all the way up
at your applications level.
And what you're doing is
you are allocating objects.
You're creating new objects.
You may be calling malloc directly.
But these are ultimately allocations.
Now, it would be really interesting
to see if you could do this.
It would be really expensive
to make a system call into the
kernel every time you needed,
you know, a few bytes of memory.
So what happens is that these
allocations end up getting carved
out of larger chunks of memory
that are allocated as necessary.
So for example,
when you first start allocating memory,
the malloc library may
allocate a 1 megabyte chunk,
and then as you ask for
little bits of memory,
it'll carve pieces out for those objects.
So then what happens in the kernel is it
takes these virtual memory objects and
then it maps them to physical memory.
It takes the pages that are used and
then as your application needs them,
it brings them in into physical memory.
Now, there's one very important
thing to note here.
As I mentioned,
when you think of your application,
you think of heap memory,
the things that you're allocating.
But the reality is that that
is just part of the story,
just the tip of the iceberg,
as we might say.
The answer is that there is a
lot there under the surface.
Question is, what are these other things?
What is filling up your address
space and using your memory?
So in addition to this heap
memory that you're familiar with,
there are also things like the
code for your application and
the code for frameworks and
libraries that you're linking,
global variables and statics,
your thread stacks,
if you have any local variables
or you've got registered data
that's saved onto the stack,
image data, decompressed image data,
CA layer backing stores,
the contents of your layers.
If you're using some sort of database,
there's probably a cache.
That is in use to speed up accesses.
And there's actually additional
memory being used outside your
application in the render server.
So that's kind of the
basics of memory on iOS.
So what types of memory
use actually matter?
And again, this is a distinction
between clean and dirty.
We're going to keep coming back to that,
so keep that in mind.
And so I want, just for a second,
for you to put yourself in the
frame of mind of someone who's
designing a system where you're
trying to manage a limited resource,
and memory is a limited resource.
And so when the time comes
when it's running out,
what do you do?
How can we reclaim more
memory for our needs?
So one answer,
and this is a very common answer
that is used in a lot of systems,
is to take stuff,
the data that's in memory,
and write it out to disk,
create a swap file and store it there.
Because of kind of the characteristics
of our devices and our environment,
that's actually not what happens on iOS.
We do not page memory out to disk.
So we can't do that.
What can we do?
Well, we can just throw it away.
And this is, in fact, what happens.
We take stuff that is in memory,
and we just dump it.
So that seems problematic,
because what if that was memory
that your application needed?
And sometimes that is the case.
And if the system has no choice
but to get rid of this memory
that your application depended on,
its only recourse is to
terminate your application.
And obviously,
you don't want that to happen.
So how can you keep it from happening?
And the answer is in this distinction
between clean memory and dirty memory.
Clean memory is memory for
which a copy exists on disk.
So for example,
the code for your application
is needed in memory to execute,
but there's an exact copy of
it already present in disk.
And so if the system is
running low on memory,
it can just purge that memory
and then bring it in at a later
time from disk if it needs it.
Same thing with the code for
any frameworks that you use.
If you've got memory mapped files,
same deal.
So then what's dirty?
The answer is everything else.
So if you've got heap allocations,
if you've got, say,
a JPEG that you're displaying on the
screen and needs to be decompressed,
that decompressed data is dirty.
These database caches
are going to be dirty.
So the answer is that
most things are dirty.
So this is kind of an abstract concept,
and I wanted to help
make it more concrete,
so we're gonna play a little game show.
It's called Clean or Dirty.
There are no prizes,
but hopefully you can follow along.
So we've got this code snippet here,
and what I want to do is display
"Welcome to WWDC" in a UI alert view.
So what I'm doing is I've got an
NSString that I'm creating dynamically
via NSString string with UTF-8 string.
And so what this actually does is it
creates a copy of this constant C string
and creates the NSString from that.
And the question is,
is this NSString clean or is it dirty?
The answer is that it's dirty.
Because we had to make
a copy of this constant,
this is an object that we
were allocating on the heap,
and thus it's going to be dirty.
So let's modify this example a little
bit and just use a constant NSString.
Is this going to be clean or dirty?
Now, one interesting thing about
NSString is that they're actually
stored in the data segment,
but they're stored in a read-only
portion of the data segment.
And so what that means is that
since that data isn't written to,
there's still a copy of it on disk,
and so this will
actually end up as clean.
Let's get a little more complicated.
So here's a function that is
probably inappropriately named.
It should probably start with new,
but it's allocating some memory,
and we're just going to allocate a
10-megabyte buffer directly using malloc.
Is this memory clean or dirty?
Now one thought might be, well,
it's an allocation in the heap,
it's going to be dirty,
but one thing that you may know about
malloc is that the contents of that
memory upon allocation are undefined,
and so they don't really
have any specified value.
So there's no need to keep
undefined values in memory.
So this memory is actually clean.
However,
as soon as you go and write to it,
it becomes dirty, because again,
there's no copy of this present on disk.
There's nowhere to bring it in from.
Let's do some image examples.
So here we've got a UI image that we're
creating from an image in our app bundle.
That's the WWC 2012 logo.
And it's kind of important to
note that a few things happen
when you create a UI image.
So initially, UI image is just kind of a
thin wrapper around a CG image,
as you may have heard in
the last presentation.
And then, so in this case,
we've got a JPEG that's backing it.
So then at the point where we
go and display it on screen,
that's actually going to get decompressed
and a bitmap is going to be created.
So is this clean or dirty?
Well, there are actually a number
of different parts here,
right?
We've got our UI image,
we've got our CG image,
we've got our bitmap.
But the answer is that actually
all of those things are dirty.
We had to decompress
the JPEG into a bitmap,
and that bitmap itself is
not stored anywhere else.
So this counts as dirty memory.
And then just one last image example.
In this case,
we're actually going to go and take
a snapshot of a view that's on screen
using UI graphics begin image context
and then see a layer rendering context.
We're basically taking a view
and we're going to render
it into this image context.
And that's going to create a bitmap.
And then we're going to go and
create a UI image from that.
So in this case,
there's no file backing it.
It's just the bitmap.
Hopefully at this point,
you can see that this is
going to be dirty as well.
None of this existed on disk.
It's just a snapshot that we
took of something on screen.
So the bottom line of all this,
and this is something
that I've already said,
is that most app allocations
are indeed dirty.
Most things that you do are
going to result in dirty memory.
So it's really important to look
at all of your memory usage and
see where you can reduce it.
So that was number two.
Number three is what I think
is a really interesting part,
which is what actually happens
when the system runs low on memory.
And we've got our nice little
iTunes-style progress bar here.
And it's helpful to view the
memory available in the system
in terms of clean memory,
dirty memory, and free memory.
And this is actually a pretty
normal state of the system.
At first glance,
it might be a little concerning
to see so little free memory,
but there's a large
amount of clean memory,
and if the system needs more,
it can just evict some of those clean
pages to use them for something else.
And one model that we have is free
memory is wasted memory because it's
possible that those pages might be
needed at some point in the future.
So there's really no
need to throw them away.
So let's say we launch your application,
and your application is cutting edge.
It's doing cool new stuff,
and that takes memory.
So you're going to allocate some objects,
maybe bring in some images,
display them on the screen,
and that is going to cause your
amount of dirty memory to go up.
And by and large,
the system will indeed evict clean pages.
in order to make room for that.
However, if your application
continues to allocate memory,
eventually the system will
run into memory pressure.
And the definition of memory pressure
that I'm going to use is that the
amount of time or the rate at which the
system needs to turn over clean pages,
you know, it's bringing in a page,
it's using it,
and then it needs to evict it
again to bring in something else,
gets faster and faster and faster.
And that turns into a
performance problem.
You know, it's kind of a
manifestation of thrashing.
So at this point,
the system needs to recover
some memory in order to restore
performance and keep operating.
And so what it's going to
do is it's going to go and
terminate some background apps.
At that point,
all of the dirty memory from those
background apps is no longer useful,
and so it ends up in the free column.
And then the rest of it
is primarily your memory.
And then,
kind of as you go and you continue
and you bring in more pages,
the system will actually move
that free memory back into clean.
And we're kind of back
to a normal state again.
So when I do this example,
I talked about your app being the
one in the foreground and we're
terminating other people's applications.
But your application could just as
easily be in the situation of being
the one that's about to be terminated.
So how do you avoid that?
We have our primary mechanism
for that is in memory warnings.
And they are a fact of life,
they are going to happen,
and so the question is,
how will your application respond?
This is your last chance to preserve
the user's experience before your
application is potentially terminated.
And that's a serious event,
and it's something that
it's vital to respond to.
So the first thing is to make
sure that your application is
even in a position to respond.
So these notifications are delivered
on the main thread of your application.
So if you're kind of running and you're
doing something on your main thread,
you're allocating a lot of memory,
you may be blocking your main thread,
and so these notifications never
actually get through to you,
and you may never have a
chance to respond to them.
The other thing is to avoid large,
rapid allocations.
The system will send
you a memory warning,
but if you're allocating memory
so quickly that it is forced
to make a decision before you
have a chance to free memory,
then it may have no choice to
terminate your application,
even though you could have freed
some of that memory if you'd
gotten the notification in time.
So by allocating memory
gradually instead of all at once,
you avoid forcing the system's hand.
So, sorry, one other thing is that if
your application is in the
background and it is suspended,
it actually won't be resumed in
order to handle these notifications.
So if you're in the background,
it's wise to actually release
non-critical memory in your
application did enter background
UI application delegate callback.
So how do you handle these warnings?
The answer is that you want to free
as much memory as possible without
sacrificing the user experience.
And those are at odds.
And that's going to depend
on your particular use case.
You need to decide what is acceptable,
what is that trade-off.
We provide a lot of different
points at which you can receive
a memory warning and handle it.
First of all,
there's a notification posted to
the default notification center.
UI application did receive
memory warning notification.
We invoke a method on your
UI application delegate.
And then each of your view controllers
will also have the did receive memory
warning method invoked on them.
Now,
one other mechanism that you may know
of from past years to release memory
in situations that are no longer needed
is UIViewControllerViewDidUnload.
In iOS 6, we're actually no longer
calling this method.
And the reason is that iOS has
gotten much better about purging
memory associated with your
views when they're not on screen.
This was actually a major source of
bugs where applications were freeing
memory without necessarily getting
rid of all the references to them.
So there's actually no
need to do this anymore,
and we think it will
eliminate a lot of bugs.
But what that does mean is that if
you were using that as a place to
release memory that otherwise you might
want to release in a memory warning,
you'll probably need to adjust.
So,
this is a question we've gotten a lot:
How much memory can I use?
And our answer has always been,
first of all, as little as possible,
but second of all,
you need to test on each device.
Our devices have
different characteristics,
and things like the screen resolution,
things like the amount
of memory available,
are really going to affect
how much memory is available.
So on the new iPad,
we have actually set a limit,
and the limit is 650 megabytes.
And we did this to provide certainty
to you so that you know that there
is some amount of memory that is
likely to be available to your
application and that you can use.
If you go over this amount,
the system will terminate
your application.
However, that doesn't mean that
the 650 megabytes is free,
and you should just go
ahead and use it right away.
At that point, there are going to be
effects in the system.
It's very likely that some of the
user's background applications
will be terminated to create memory
for your application and so on.
So this isn't a free amount,
but it is the maximum that you can use.
All right, that was a lot of stuff.
I talked a lot.
But now I want to get really
practical and kind of show you,
using our tools,
how you can kind of see some of the
concepts that I've talked about.
And so for that,
I'm going to show you a little demo.
So for this demo,
we're going to use our trusty friend,
the WWC application.
And just to make it clear,
these are issues that we have inserted in
order to demonstrate the concepts here.
Rest assured that the version of
the app that is running on your
devices has been thoroughly memory
tested and behaves like a champ.
So the first thing I'm going
to do is I'm actually going to
run the application on an iPad.
I've got my iPad over here.
And I'm using the profile action,
so this will actually launch instruments.
Just give it a second here.
And I'm going to use the
allocations instrument,
which may be familiar to many of you.
All right.
So I'm just going to-- I'll be
coming back to the VM Tracker.
For now, I'm just going to turn on
automatic snapshot because
it's a snapshot-based tool.
And so you'll see that we're gradually--
our memory usage is gradually increasing.
So what I'm going to do on the iPad
is I'm in the photos view here.
And so I'm just going to go and
start swiping through some photos,
just so you can see that.
And so now I'm actually going to
go back to my two instruments here.
And you can see that, you know,
kind of there are...
Maybe a few spikes, but in general,
the memory usage is remaining pretty
flat as I move through these photos here.
And so if you look at the
allocations instrument alone,
you might conclude that, OK,
this isn't actually
using that much memory.
However,
if you look at the VM tracker here,
which is an instrument that maybe doesn't
get as much attention as it should,
it's actually telling a different story.
So if I just...
So, if I just kind of look here and drag,
you can see that my
allocations have kind of,
you know,
they have really not changed that much.
In fact,
they were kind of at 7 megabytes and
they ended up at maybe 5 and a half.
Just let me zoom in here to show.
Daniel Delwood:
But my VM tracker that shows my
dirty memory shows that I went
from 66 megabytes of dirty memory
and I'm up to 244 megabytes.
So that's a big difference.
If you just looked at
the allocations tool,
you might conclude that things were fine.
Daniel Delwood: But VM tracker is telling
you a different story.
It's showing you memory that
is beyond your heap that
is stored in other regions.
Now, if you kind of look at
the VM tracker here,
you can kind of look at
the different regions.
And again,
it's this dirty amount here that
we really want to emphasize.
That's really what's most
important to look at here.
Now I'm actually going
to go and stop this.
I'm going to rerun it on the
simulator just to demonstrate
what happens in this application
when we simulate a memory warning.
So I'm going to run the
allocations instrument again.
And our application is launching.
And I'm going to go to the Photos tab.
And let me just turn on
my VM tracker here again.
And I'm going to do the same
thing and swipe through my photos.
And you'll see essentially
the same effect over time.
It's only snapshotting
every three seconds,
so it takes a little
time for it to show up.
But my allocations are essentially flat,
but my dirty memory is steadily rising.
Now, what I would hope is that I've
implemented a response to memory warning,
so that if the system
does run low on memory,
I can respond.
And so in the simulator,
you can simulate a memory
warning under the hardware menu.
So I'm going to do that.
Unfortunately, okay,
that did make a difference
in my dirty memory.
That's unexpected.
What I was expecting to see was that
there was very little difference
in the amount of memory being used.
So let's examine why that is.
So the view controller that is
responsible for this is actually
called the WC Photos View Controller.
All right, and you can see here that I've
left a to-do for myself saying
I need to handle a memory warning.
So what I'm going to do is I'm actually
going to go and very quickly implement
a handler for these memory warnings.
And look at that, that's magic.
And so all I'm going to do is I'm
going to go through my list of photos
and set the UI image associated
with each of those photos to be nil,
which, since this is an Arc application,
will cause them to be released.
So let's profile this again
and then see what happens.
All right.
Oh.
My mistake, so I just need to...
Run this again here.
All right, let's just do this fresh.
So we're going to launch Instruments,
run the allocations tool.
Again,
I'm just going to turn on VM Tracker.
Go back to these photos again.
I'm just going to continue
to swipe through them.
And you can again see that our dirty
memory is in fact steadily rising,
so I've gone through them all now.
And so I'm going to go through
again and simulate a memory warning,
and let's see what happens this time.
All right, well,
it got a little lower than before.
But the point is that that's made a
real difference to my dirty memory,
even though, as you can see,
the amount of heat memory that
I'm using actually didn't change.
So just looking at the allocations
instrument does not give you a
full picture of what goes on.
It's a good starting point,
but in terms of seeing the full
effect of what you're doing in
terms of memory in the system,
VM Tracker is your friend.
It's what you want to look at.
So if you get one thing out of that demo,
one thing, what I'm hoping that
you'll get out of it,
is to pay attention to dirty memory.
Dirty memory is the scarce resource
in the system because it leaves the
system with no other option to reclaim
that but to terminate your application.
Now, on that same note,
one thing that's very important is to
avoid usage spikes in your application.
And so what that means is that because
dirty memory is the most important,
any time that you have a big
spike where you're using a lot
of memory even for just a second,
it requires the same actions to be taken
as would be taken if you were using
that memory for a long period of time.
Because physical memory is
a resource that's limited,
those spikes really matter.
So if you're seeing these big spikes in
instruments and allocations where you're
going way up and you're going down,
it's important to try
and smooth those out.
And one thing that can really help
is if you've kind of got a tight
loop where you're allocating a lot of
objects that are then auto-released
is to use auto-release pools.
I guess at this point,
I will invite up my
colleague Daniel Delwood,
who is a software engineer
on the instruments team,
to kind of get really practical
and show you how you can put these
tools and tricks to use for you.
Thank you very much, Morgan.
I want to talk to you about using
tools to really identify the memory
usage in your application and
what you can do to use it better.
So, the first thing I want to
talk about is the process.
As you may have seen this
slide in other talks,
we really want to emphasize that it's
important to follow a process when
you're looking for performance issues.
You need to identify and reproduce the
problem you're trying to solve so that
then you can profile it with tools,
make some hypotheses,
and iterate here to understand really
what's going on in your application.
And then finally,
you can make those changes that will
hopefully make your application much
better and much more memory efficient.
So, going back to the idea of an iceberg,
and most of the memory that
you think of being in the
heap is on top of the iceberg.
And that's kind of a problem.
Because, you know,
this memory is not the whole story.
And so you may think, okay,
what can I do?
Because there's a lot of
memory under the surface,
and I really want to get the
most out of my application.
Well, the good news is that most
dirty memory is in some form
or fashion related to the heap.
So this means that, you know,
if you've got a UI image,
it has those references
to backing stores,
and if you optimize
your UI image objects,
you'll do a lot better.
So let's talk a little
bit more about this.
What can you do specifically to reduce
your entire application's memory usage?
Well, first thing is to understand
your view hierarchy.
And as the other talk
that was just in here,
the iOS performance graphics
talk was talking about,
the more pixels you draw,
the more memory you've got to
use to make those large bitmaps
and show them on the screen.
And you can really get a lot
of mileage just by doing that.
And I think that's what we're
going to focus on today.
And that's just by following
some of those performance
tips in that graphics talk.
And I'd like to refer you back to that.
But what we're going to focus
on today is the second thing,
and that's avoiding recurring
heap growth in your application.
And like I said, it doesn't matter if
these objects are small.
They may be referencing really large
VM regions that are hard to see.
So what are the top three
that you should look for?
Well, first of all,
you should look for leaked memory.
And leaked memory is probably
the easiest to detect.
We've got great tools for it.
And it shows you memory
that's inaccessible.
There's no other references to it.
And it really just can't be used again.
So it's completely wasted.
And so whenever you detect leaked memory,
as I'll show you a little
bit later in a demo here,
you should do your best
to get rid of all of it,
especially because it's so easy to find.
The second thing,
and probably more important,
is abandoned memory.
And this is memory that
is not in your memory.
It's memory that you could reference,
but you never actually use again.
And so this is memory like caches
that are slightly misimplemented,
and memory that you allocate
but never go back to.
And so it's a real, real big problem that
you need to look into.
The third one, of course,
is those caches that are referenced
and waiting for your use,
but they're speculative.
The user may use them,
but they also may not.
So you need to be very smart about
allocating only the memory that you
think the user is actually going to use.
So let's talk about how to detect it.
Well, the central premise behind this is
that memory use in your application
shouldn't grow without bound
when you repeat an operation.
So what do I mean by this?
Well, for example, say you're pushing and
popping a view controller.
You push, you pop,
you expect that the memory
usage when you get back will
be the same as when you left.
And if you repeat this
over and over again,
you really don't want to see
your memory usage going up.
If you're scrolling in a table view,
that's another example of that, where,
you know, your scrolling goes by,
you see all these rows, and you think,
okay, well, my memory usage,
it's fine if it goes up.
But you should really be reusing
those table cells and hopefully
not using memories you go through
the scroll view multiple times.
So let's talk about repetition
here and how it actually
elicits that memory growth.
Well, say you've got a graph,
and at some point in your application,
you're going to see a graph that says,
oh, I'm going to use this graph.
And you're going to see that
the graph is pretty stable.
Well, this, you can sort of think
of as your baseline,
right?
Your application isn't really doing much,
and it's a great starting
point for your investigations.
Now,
you're going to perform that operation,
which is going to bring
it into a new state,
and perhaps you're using more memory.
Perhaps you're viewing a photo, right?
Your application is going to do some
really interesting and cool things.
But then when you return
to that original state,
you might expect that it would be the
same memory usage as the baseline.
Well, of course,
the first time you do this,
there's a lot of caches to warm up,
and that is really going
to be your warm-up phase.
So the first iteration doesn't
give you the information you
need to solve the problem.
So that's why you go ahead and repeat it,
let's say five times.
Once you've repeated it,
then you can take a look at the
difference between returning to
the original state after the first
iteration and then returning to the
original state after the last iteration,
and that is your wasted
So how can you find that with our tools?
Well,
the allocations tool is really powerful
in that it can show you backtraces for
every single heap allocation you make.
So it tracks all of
your heap allocations,
including your
Objective-C and C++ objects.
Now,
for those of you who are C++ developers,
you may actually need to enable
this option because it's not on by
default for performance reasons.
There's also the ability to record
not just the malloc and free events,
but the retain, release,
and auto-release events,
which comes in really,
really useful if you're trying
to track down leaks or other
reference counting issues.
And finally,
allocations has statistics that it
provides you by allocation type,
and also you can put this
information in call trees,
which is really helpful for determining
the point in your code that's
responsible for all these allocations.
Finally, there's heap snapshot
technology built in,
which is the really important part
to find that abandoned memory and
persistent memory growth over time.
So let's talk about it.
Well, taking a practical example of that
pushing and popping a view controller,
let's say you're getting
your app into a steady state.
When you launch your application,
it comes up and it's showing your view.
And then you go ahead and
perform the operation.
And after each iteration here,
what you're going to do is take
a snapshot of the heap with
the allocations instrument and
repeat this multiple times.
Ideally, once you've done this, you know,
five, ten times,
it's those middle iterations that
you really want to focus on and
hope that those go down to zero.
Because if they do,
then your application is indeed
well-behaved as you'd expect.
So let's go ahead and take
a look at this in a demo.
So I'm going to use the same application,
the
And I'm going to go ahead and
run this in the simulator.
Now, luckily for us,
heap allocations work mostly
like they work on a device,
the same as they are in the simulator.
And so I'm going to just go
ahead and select the leaks
template here and profile.
And my app starts up in the simulator.
And this is really a
great place to analyze,
because it's really great
for rapid prototyping,
doing things over and over again,
and so on.
So I launch my application,
and I'm going to select
different views here.
And you'll notice that Instruments
is recording in the background.
And what I see is that allocations,
you know, gets to a pretty steady
point of about four,
five and a half megabytes.
If I click on my leaks instrument,
you'll notice that it's doing automatic
snapshotting at 10-second intervals.
Now, what this is doing is it's really
pausing my app and taking a lot
of time to look through it and
find memory that's unreferenced.
In this case, I'm not finding any.
So I'm going to go to my application,
and I'm going to pick a
scenario that I want to
So for this one,
I'm going to show off the filter
capabilities of the iPad app.
And I'll bring up the filter field.
And I can really call anything I want
the baseline for my investigation.
So I'm going to call this screen
with the filter options open with
everything selected my baseline.
So I'll just go over to
instruments and select marqueep.
And it creates that baseline
snapshot for me at 5.11 megs.
All right, so why don't I turn these off,
close it, turn it back on.
Now I've returned to my steady state,
and I'll mark my heap again.
And I'm just going to repeat
this a couple of times to see
how my application performs.
What I'd really expect here is that
I wouldn't have many allocations,
even though my filter is actually
doing a lot of work for me.
I'm going to a core database,
looking at values and
presenting them on the screen.
So I've done this a few times now.
And I'll stop my application.
And you'll notice that for each
one of these in the middle,
I'm experiencing a heap
growth of about 300K.
Now, that's kind of interesting.
If I turn it open,
you'll see a list of the objects that
were allocated between Heapshot 2
and Heapshot 3 that are objects that,
you know,
I didn't anticipate being alive.
I can look through these
and see I've got an array,
I've got a set, I've got some -- just
general malloc memory.
But what I want to look for here
in this list are objects that
hold on to a lot of resources.
So in this case,
I can see pretty quickly that this
UI tap gesture recognizer is probably
what I'm going to be looking for,
because, you know, this is a UI element.
It's got to have views and
other objects behind it.
In this case, no views.
But I can turn this down and
see a list of all the objects.
I created 816 of these
between the snapshots.
So if I select one of them and
bring in the extended detail view,
I'll see a backtrace on the
right of where this came from.
Now, I'm just going to go ahead and
double click on a black frame in this
backtrace to jump directly to my code.
And I'm actually going to show it
in Xcode to make this easier to see.
So here we are, and we're in a table cell
for row at index path method.
All right, that's fine.
It's not uncommon for us to be
allocating a gesture recognizer here.
But what we're looking for is
why we're allocating so many.
So let's look for the allocation here.
Here's our gesture recognizer,
allocating it with target.
We're also creating a
double tap recognizer.
Great.
And then we're adding
it to our session cell.
Now if we go back and
look at our session cell,
it comes from-- here we go,
DQ session cell.
We're doing cell reuse properly.
That's great.
And if there's no session cell,
we create a new one.
Oh, but there's the issue.
We're actually adding our tap gesture
recognizer even if we reuse the cell.
Now it's already got one attached,
and we don't need to attach
one every single time.
So what I can do is I can
actually just attach this
and I are going to talk about
the most common mistake we
make when we create a new tool.
So I'll just save and profile that again.
And actually,
to show you a different issue,
I'm going to remove
this from the simulator.
does not seem to like me today.
So I'll build and run my application.
It launches.
And this time I'm actually going
to watch it live to see if my
change has actually made the
gesture recognizer issue go away.
So the allocations table view here
is actually showing me all of the
different categories in my app.
I see strings, malloc blocks,
a bunch of stuff.
But what I'm interested in in this
case is the gesture recognizer.
So I can just type in that.
You'll see that I've
actually created 86 so far,
or 86 targets so far.
So let me go to the schedule, pick a day,
and filter.
And actually,
we'll notice in the background
that the number isn't going up.
So this is exactly what I'd hoped for.
So, all right,
that actually is dealing with the
issue that I was seeing earlier.
That was kind of using the tools to
find some persistent memory growth
using the heap snapshotting technology.
And it's a very, very powerful tool.
It's one that I really highly encourage
you to exercise on your application.
Come up with a set of scenarios,
some things that the
user will commonly do,
and then repeat them over and over again,
taking snapshots after each one.
Now,
let's go on and talk about some tools,
tips, and tricks,
some ways of getting the most out
of instruments and to understand
the memory in your application.
So I'd like to encourage you to
get to know your application.
And what I mean by this is pay
attention to that list of objects,
specifically objects
holding onto resources.
Now, these may be UI images,
view controllers, NS operations,
a bunch of different things.
And anything that
really wraps large data,
because it may be difficult to see
even though the objects are small,
there may be a lot under the surface.
And so, you know, for instance,
this could even be an NSData with
a one megabyte buffer.
Now, another thing that's important
to track are your objects.
And these are objects that hopefully,
you know,
you may have a class name prefix.
It's really, really easy just to type
that into the search field,
filter down to your objects,
and validate those
patterns that you expect.
If you expect that, you know,
your view controller goes away
when the user moves away from it,
make sure that's happening.
And finally, simulate memory warnings
in your application,
like Morgan showed,
to make sure that you're being a
good citizen and doing all that
you can to work well on iOS.
Now,
memory bugs actually are pretty expensive
when you encounter them in the wild.
And if your users are
reporting them to you,
it's going to make you
have to turn another build,
and it's a very time-consuming
process for you.
So I'd like to really encourage you
to switch to Arc as the first thing,
because it's a really,
really powerful technology and allows
you to stop thinking about retain-release
and allows you to think about the object
relationships in your application.
Another powerful technology
is the Xcode Static Analyzer.
And this tool is great for
finding uninitialized variables,
tracking down some common programming
mistakes that it's very easy to
make and sometimes very difficult
and time-consuming to find.
Finally,
use the leaks instrument and make sure
you only make one fix at a time because
if your fix is a little bit wrong or
sometimes there's other code that was
relying on a bug and you just need
to make sure that you don't introduce
other issues when you fix these leaks.
Now, when it comes to fixing leaks,
you may say, well,
I am already running Arc.
There's not going to be any leaks, right?
Well, it's not entirely true,
because Arc doesn't solve the
problem of retained cycles for you.
Now, you can use the cycles and routes
view in instruments just by
going to the leaks instrument,
pulling down off the jump bar,
and selecting cycles and routes.
And one thing I would really
like to caution you to be
careful of is block captures.
Now, blocks are a really,
really powerful technology,
but they can sometimes lead to
unexpected behavior if you're
really not anticipating it.
So, for example, here,
I'm using the really powerful
block-based NS Notification Center API.
And if you'll notice here,
I've got my self.document being set
whenever this notification gets sent.
Now what the compiler does here is
it actually is going to capture my
variable strongly and retain it.
And what this does is mean that if
I have a retain cycle created by this,
it's just because the compiler is
doing something to be very safe.
The notification center is going
to have to copy my block to the
heap from the stack and in doing
so create this capture itself.
All right, so what if you're not
actually referencing self?
What if you're just using an I var?
Well, if you're using an instance
variable like this,
the compiler is going to
do the exact same thing.
It's smart enough to know
that you need self around,
and so it just captures self and
references through the pointer.
All right, so if this is the cause
of your retain cycles,
how can you get around it?
Well, it's pretty easy.
All you need to do is create a
weak variable to capture self,
and then use the weak variable
in place of your self or
even your instance variable.
And I'd highly encourage you
to use property accessors here.
Now, one thing to note is that
if you're running Arc,
weak is sufficient.
If you're running with
manual retain release,
you'll also need to
add the block keyword.
Finally,
there's incorrect retain release,
which can lead to leaks.
And this is a very classical problem,
very easy to do under
manual retain release,
just forgetting to write a release
or writing an extra retain.
And it's also possible with
incorrect arc bridging.
And so you'll need to
be careful about this.
If you encounter leaks of this type,
just select a single instance,
hit the focus button,
and go in and take a look at the
full retain release history for it.
Now, I'd really encourage you also
to look for the backtraces at
both the beginning and the end,
because these are most
likely to be at fault.
[Transcript missing]
Now some final tracing tips
to hopefully get the most out
of your use of instruments.
Make notes with each trace that you take.
These can be totally invaluable
later as you send the trace to
other members of your team or
you're looking back at it from,
you know, a month later.
These can be very helpful for knowing
what you were doing at a certain
time that you see a memory spike.
And I really highly
encourage you to add these.
Also, filter specific time intervals.
Using our range selection buttons,
you can set in and out points,
or you can also option drag in
the timeline and select just
ranges to filter down your
detail view to those time ranges.
And finally, please be conscious of
the snapshot intervals.
As Morgan showed,
the VM tracker was snapshot-based,
as well as the leaks instrument.
And there may be slight pauses when
that happens on your iPad or iPhone.
And what you'll want to do is just
not worry too much about frame
drops during these intervals.
[Transcript missing]